The long and short scales are two powers of ten number naming systems that are consistent with each other for smaller numbers, but are contradictory for larger numbers. Other numbering systems, particularly in East Asia and South Asia, have large number naming that differs from both the long and the short scales. Such numbering systems include the Indian numbering system and Chinese, Japanese, and Korean numerals. Much of the remainder of the world have adopted either the short or long scale. Countries using the long scale include most countries in continental Europe and most that are French-speaking, German-speaking and Spanish-speaking. Use of the short scale is found in most English-speaking and Arabic-speaking speaking countries, most Eurasian post-communist countries, and Brazil.

For powers of ten less than 9 (one, ten, hundred, thousand, and million), the short and long scales are identical; but, for larger powers of ten, the two systems differ in confusing ways. For identical names, the long scale grows by multiples of one million (106), whereas the short scale grows by multiples of one thousand (103). For example, the short scale billion is one thousand million (109), whereas in the long scale, billion is one million million (1012), making the word 'billion' a false friend between long- and short-scale languages. The long scale system includes additional names for interleaved values, typically replacing the word-ending '-ion' with '-iard'.

To avoid confusion, the International System of Units (SI) recommends using the metric prefixes to indicate magnitude. For example, giga- is always 109, which is 'billion' in short scale but 'milliard' in long scale.

In both scales, names are given to orders of magnitude at increments of 1000. Both systems use the same names for magnitudes less than 109. Differences arise from the use of identical names for larger magnitudes. For the same magnitude name (n-illion), the value is 103n+3 in the short scale but 106n in the long scale for positive integers n.

In some languages, the long scale uses additional names for the intermediate multipliers, replacing the ending -ion with -iard; for example, the next multiplier after million is milliard (109); after a billion it is billiard (1015). Hence, a long scale n-illiard equals 106n+3.

The following table shows the size of first few short and long scale magnitudes. Notice how billion and trillion are in both scales but have different sizes.

The following tables show the corresponding names and values of the two scales.

Note that instead of using an intermediate long scale word (illiard), a quantity is sometimes specified in terms of the smaller illion word. For example, "thousand billion" instead of "billiard".

The different sizes of the same name of the two scales can be described as:

One way to avoid confusion between the two scales is to use positional notation. For example, 1,000,000,000,000 rather than 1 trillion (short scale) or 1 billion (long scale). This method becomes unwieldy for very large numbers.

Combinations of the unambiguous words: ten, hundred, thousand, and million. For example: one thousand million and one million million.

Scientific notation (for example 1×1010), or its engineering notation variant (for example 10×109), or the computing variant E notation (for example 1e10). This is the most common practice among scientists and mathematicians.

SI metric prefixes. For example, giga for 109 and tera for 1012 can give gigawatt (109 W) and terawatt (1012 W). Use with non-SI units is unambiguous. For example, giga-dollars, megabucks, k€, and M€.

Although this situation has been developing since the 1200s, the first recorded use of the terms short scale (French: échelle courte) and long scale (French: échelle longue) was by the French mathematician Geneviève Guitel in 1975.

The short scale was never widespread before its general adoption in the United States. It has been taught in American schools since the early 1800s. It has since become common in other English-speaking nations and several other countries. For most of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the United Kingdom largely used the long scale, whereas the United States used the short scale, so that the two systems were often referred to as British and American in the English language. After several decades of increasing informal British usage of the short scale, in 1974 the government of the UK adopted it, and it is used for all official purposes. The British usage and American usage are now identical.

The existence of the different scales means that care must be taken when comparing large numbers between languages or countries, or when interpreting old documents in countries where the dominant scale has changed over time. For example, British English, French, and Italian historical documents can refer to either the short or long scale, depending on the date of the document, since each of the three countries has used both systems at various times in its history. Today, the United Kingdom officially uses the short scale, but France and Italy use the long scale.

The pre-1974 former British English word billion, post-1961 current French word billion, post-1994 current Italian word bilione, Spanish billón, German Billion, Dutch biljoen, Danish billion, Swedish biljon, Finnish biljoona, Slovenian bilijon, Polish bilion, and European Portuguese word bilião (with a different spelling to the Brazilian Portuguese variant, but in Brazil referring to short scale) all refer to 1012, being long-scale terms. Therefore, each of these words translates to the American English or post-1974 British English word: trillion (1012 in the short scale), and not billion (109 in the short scale).

On the other hand, the pre-1961 former French word billion, pre-1994 former Italian word bilione, Brazilian Portuguese word bilhão, and Welsh word biliwn all refer to 109, being short scale terms. Each of these words translates to the American English or post-1974 British English word billion (109 in the short scale).

The term billion originally meant 1012 when introduced. In long scale countries, milliard was defined to its current value of 109, leaving billion at its original 1012 value and so on for the larger numbers. Some of these countries, but not all, introduced new words billiard, trilliard, etc. as intermediate terms. In some short scale countries, milliard was defined to 109 and billion dropped altogether, with trillion redefined down to 1012 and so on for the larger numbers. In many short scale countries, milliard was dropped altogether and billion was redefined down to 109, adjusting downwards the value of trillion and all the larger numbers.

The root mil in million does not refer to the numeral, 1. The word, million, derives from the Old French, milion, from the earlier Old Italian, milione, an intensification of the Latin word, mille, a thousand. That is, a million is a big thousand, much as a great gross is a dozen gross or 12 × 144 = 1728.

The word milliard, or its translation, is found in many European languages and is used in those languages for 109. However, it is not found in American English, which uses billion, and not used in British English, which preferred to use thousand million before the current usage of billion. The financial term yard, which derives from milliard, is used on financial markets, as, unlike the term billion, it is internationally unambiguous and phonetically distinct from million. Likewise, many long scale countries use the word billiard (or similar) for one thousand long scale billions (i.e., 1015), and the word trilliard (or similar) for one thousand long scale trillions (i.e., 1021), etc.

Coueyte not his goodesFor millions of moneye

Translation:

Covet not his goodsfor millions of money

... item noctes que le premier greton dembas vault ung, le second vault dix, le trois vault cent, le quart vult mille, le Ve vault dix M, le VIe vault cent M, le VIIe vault Milion, Le VIIIe vault dix Million, Le IXe vault cent Millions, Le Xe vault Mil Millions, Le XIe vault dix mil Millions, Le XIIe vault Cent mil Millions, Le XIIIe vault bymillion, Le XIIIIe vault dix bymillions, Le XVe vault cent mil bymillions, Le XVIe vault mil bymillions, Le XVIIe vault dix Mil bymillions, Le XVIIIe vault cent mil bymillions, Le XIXe vault trimillion, Le XXe vault dix trimillions ...

Translation:

... Likewise, note that the first counter from the bottom is worth one, the 2nd is worth ten, the 3rd is worth one hundred, the 4th is worth one thousand, the 5th is worth ten thousand, the 6th is worth one hundred thousand, the 7th is worth a million, the 8th is worth ten millions, the 9th is worth one hundred millions, the 10th is worth one thousand millions, the 11th is worth ten thousand millions, the 12th is worth one hundred thousand million, the 13th is worth a bymillion, the 14th is worth ten bymillions, the 15th is worth one bymillions, the 16th is worth one thousand bymillions, the 17th is worth ten thousand bymillions, the 18th is worth hundred thousand bymillions, the 19th is worth a trimillion, the 20th is worth ten trimillions ...

... Item l'on doit savoir que ung million vaultmille milliers de unitez, et ung byllion vault millemilliers de millions, et tryllion vault mille milliersde byllions, et ung quadrillion vault mille milliers detryllions et ainsi des aultres : Et de ce en est pose ungexemple nombre divise et punctoye ainsi que devant estdit, tout lequel nombre monte 745324 tryllions804300 byllions 700023 millions 654321.Exemple : 745324'8043000'700023'654321 ...

Translation:

...likewise, one should know that a million is wortha thousand thousand units, and a byllion is worth a thousandthousand millions, and tryllion is worth a thousand thousandbyllions, and a quadrillion is worth a thousand thousandtryllions, and so on for the others. And an example of this follows,a number divided up and punctuated as previouslydescribed, the whole number being 745324 tryllions,804300 byllions 700023 millions 654321.Example: 745324'8043000'700023'654321 ...

The extract from Chuquet's manuscript, the transcription and translation provided here all contain an original mistake: one too many zeros in the 804300 portion of the fully written out example: 745324'8043000 '700023'654321 ...

.. hoc est decem myriadum myriadas:quod vno verbo nostrates abaci studiosi Milliartum appellant:quasi millionum millionem

Translation:

.. this is ten myriad myriads, which in one word our students of numbers call Milliart, as if a million millions

.. milliart/ofte duysent millioenen..

Translation:

..milliart / also thousand millions..

It should be remembered that "billion" does not mean in American use (which follows the French) what it means in British. For to us it means the second power of a million, i.e. a million millions (1,000,000,000,000); for Americans it means a thousand multiplied by itself twice, or a thousand millions (1,000,000,000), what we call a milliard. Since billion in our sense is useless except to astronomers, it is a pity that we do not conform.

Although American English usage did not change, within the next 50 years, French usage changed from short scale to long, and British English usage changed from long scale to short.

Mr. Maxwell-Hyslop asked the Prime Minister whether he would make it the practice of his administration that when Ministers employ the word 'billion' in any official speeches, documents, or answers to Parliamentary Questions, they will, to avoid confusion, only do so in its British meaning of 1 million million and not in the sense in which it is used in the United States of America, which uses the term 'billion' to mean 1,000 million. The Prime Minister: No. The word 'billion' is now used internationally to mean 1,000 million and it would be confusing if British Ministers were to use it in any other sense. I accept that it could still be interpreted in this country as 1 million million and I shall ask my colleagues to ensure that, if they do use it, there should be no ambiguity as to its meaning.

The BBC and other UK mass media quickly followed the government's lead within the UK.

During the last quarter of the 20th century, most other English-speaking countries (Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Zimbabwe, etc.) either also followed this lead or independently switched to the short scale use. However, in most of these countries, some limited long scale use persists and the official status of the short scale use is not clear.

Most English-language countries and regions use the short scale with 109 being billion. For example:

Most Arabic-language countries and regions use the short scale with 109 being مليار milyar, except for a few countries like Saudi Arabia and the UAE which use the word بليون billion for 109. For example:

Other countries also use a word similar to trillion to mean 1012, etc. Whilst a few of these countries like English use a word similar to billion to mean 109, most like Arabic have kept a traditionally long scale word similar to milliard for 109. Some examples of short scale use, and the words used for 109 and 1012, are

The long scale is used by most Continental European countries and by most other countries whose languages derive from Continental Europe (with the notable exceptions of Albania, Greece and Romania ). These countries use a word similar to billion to mean 1012. Some use a word similar to milliard to mean 109, while others use a word or phrase equivalent to thousand millions.

Most Dutch-language countries and regions use the long scale with 109 = miljard.

Most French-language countries and regions use the long scale with 109 = milliard, for example:

German-language countries and regions use the long scale with 109 = Milliarde.

With the notable exception of Brazil, a short scale country, most Portuguese-language countries and regions use the long scale with 109 = mil milhões or milhar de milhões.

Most Spanish-language countries and regions use the long scale, for example:

Some examples of long scale use, and the words used for 109 and 1012, are:

Some countries use either the short or long scales, depending on the internal language being used or the context.

The following countries use naming systems for large numbers that are not etymologically related to the short and long scales:

The long and short scales are both present on most continents, with usage dependent on the language used. For example: