British Empire

Supported by:

Supported by:

See also: Hindu–German Conspiracy

The North‑West Frontier Theatre of World War I comprised a series of military campaigns waged between November 1914 and July 1917 along the North‑West Frontier Province of British India (now in Pakistan). As British India dispatched forces to European and Middle Eastern fronts, unrest intensified among local Pashtun tribes—including the Mohmands, Bunerwals, Swatis, Mahsuds, and others—who, often influenced by Ottoman and German agents, launched raids and uprisings. British‑Indian, Nepalese, and local militia forces responded with punitive expeditions, blockades, and raids, resulting in an eventual Anglo‑Indian victory. Major operations include the 1915 campaigns against the Mohmands, Bunerwals, and Swatis, the Mohmand blockade, and the 1917 Mahsud expedition. Though closely tied to World War I, the conflict remained localized and maintained stability on the frontier during the global war.

In support of the British war effort, the Indian Army deployed expeditionary forces to the Western Front, East Africa, Gallipoli, Mesopotamia, Sinai and Palestine. India was thus vulnerable to hostile attention from Afghanistan. A Turco-German mission arrived in Kabul in October 1915 with obvious strategic purpose. However, Amir Habibulla abided by his treaty obligations and maintained Afghanistan's neutrality, in the face of internal opposition from factions keen to side with the Ottoman Sultan. Hostilities on the frontier remained local.

Many operations occurred in the North-West Frontier Province through the late 1800s and all the way up to Indian Independence in 1947. Some of these occurred during WWI being carried out by tribes loyal to the Ottomans. These forces fought on and off from the time of the Ottoman entry into the war all the way until the summer of 1917.

There were two raids conducted by Kochi tribesman, They were later both suppressed by a single British brigade In March 1915.

Were a group of raids led by pro-ottoman tribesman, they was later suppressed in September 1915.

Was a blockade done on Mohmand tribesman following their declaration of Jihad. It was lifted following their suppression in 1917.

A series of engagements in early 1917. A peace agreement was reached on 10 August 1917 with a Mahsud jirga.

The Provisional Government of India and Germany smuggled weapons through Afghanistan. The Ottomans also supported the rebellion by declaring jihad.

Following the ending of the North-West Frontier Campaign many more similar instances of rebellion continued until Indian independence.