Constantinople or Istanbul, the capital and the largest city of the Ottoman Empire, was subject to several air raids during the WWI by the British from 1916 to 1918.

The bombing had a strategic background. Many times civilians were also wounded and killed. The British Forces organized their air forces and deployed them to strategic areas in the air hinterland of Istanbul, namely the Aegean Islands, and organized the squadrons that would perform fight and bombing missions from there. Thus the Minister of War Enver Pasha sent a note threatening England due to the airstrikes and civilian casualties.

The bombings led to the establishment of an electric line to the Air Force Command to speed up communication, to transfer more experienced pilots to the Aircraft Company, establishment of Istanbul Muharebat- Havaiyye Komutanlg (Istanbul Command of Air Defense), and the Ottoman government acknowledgment that the danger is much greater than previously believed.

The government took measures to protect the civilian population from the bombing, but in many cases it failed; this caused greater censure of the government by the people. A clever reconnaissance network was created, which followed the following principle: when enemy aircraft approached, the city fell into darkness so that the Turkish projector and its lights could identify the aircraft. The 9th Aviation Squadron took responsibility for chasing and engaging enemy aircraft. This contributed to minimal damage to the city during JulyAugust 1918. On August 13, the empire created new directives aimed at the active protection of the population. Citizens were obliged to be more careful and to beware of espionage activities. The commission Tetkk-i Hasarat Komisyonu was created to help the civilians and restore their damaged property. According to British reports, while Istanbul was vulnerable to air strikes, the British were not able to create the atmosphere of fear and panic they expected among the public.

During the war, the Ottoman cities of Trabzon, Izmir and Giresun were also bombarded.