Cvjetko Popovic (Serbian Cyrillic: ; 1896 9 June 1980) was a Bosnian Serb who was involved in the 1914 assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria.

He was born in what is modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina. He was an 18-year-old student, studying in Sarajevo when Danilo Ilic recruited him and his friend, Vaso Cubrilovic, to help assassinate Archduke Franz Ferdinand.

Nikola Pasic, the prime minister of the Kingdom of Serbia, heard about the plot and gave instructions for the three men to be arrested. However, his orders were not implemented and the three men arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina where they joined forces with fellow conspirators, Gavrilo Princip, Misko Jovanovic and Vaso's brother Veljko Cubrilovic.

On Sunday 28 June 1914, Franz Ferdinand and Sophie von Chotek were assassinated by Gavrilo Princip. Princip and Nedeljko Cabrinovic were captured and interrogated by the police. They eventually gave the names of their fellow conspirators. Muhamed Mehmedbasic managed to escape to Serbia but Popovic, Ilic, Jovanovic, and the Cubrilovic brothers were arrested and charged with treason and murder.

All the men were found guilty. Under Austro-Hungarian law, an offender under the age of 20 could not be executed. Nedjelko Cabrinovic, Gavrilo Princip and Trifko Grabez therefore received the maximum penalty of twenty years, whereas Vaso Cubrilovic were sentenced to 16 years and Popovic to 13 years in prison at Terezin.

Popovic was released when the Allies defeated the Central Powers in November 1918, having served four years of his 13-year sentence.

After his release from prison at the end of World War I, Popovic returned to teaching as a professor of philosophy and eventually became Curator of the Ethnographic Department of the Sarajevo Museum.

The night before the 50th anniversary of the killing of the Archduke in 1964, Popovic attended a lecture about the assassination in Sarajevo, but did not attend any of the events throughout the city, commemorating the anniversary. He was quoted as saying that he would not have taken part in the assassination had he known it would lead to war.

Marking the 55th anniversary of the event in June 1969, Popovic, then aged 73, gave an interview recalling the assassination.

Cvjetko Popovic died in Sarajevo on 9 June 1980 at the age of 84, leaving Vaso Cubrilovic as the sole surviving assassin. Cubrilovic died 10 years and two days later on 11 June 1990 at age 93.