The modus vivendi of Acroma was a pair of agreements signed by the Sanusi Order with Britain and Italy on 16 April 1917 at Acroma (Akrama).

The negotiations that led to the modus vivendi were begun by Idris al-Sanusi soon after he succeeded his uncle at the head of the order in 1917. His cousin, Ahmad al-Sharif al-Sanusi, had instigated an unsuccessful war with Britain with Ottoman and German assistance at the height of the First World War. Idris wished to enter into negotiations with Britain, but the British refused to negotiate unless their wartime ally, Italy, was included in the talks. Peace with Italy was more than al-Sharif could bear and he left Libya for the Ottoman Empire when negotiations were opened.

The Italian and British delegations arrived in Tobruk in late January 1917, while Idris stayed in Acroma. Sanusi and British messengers conveyed the parties' written proposals between the two sites. Italian delegates first visited to Acroma in late March, on which occasion Idris released an Italian prisoner-of-war as a sign of good will at the suggestion of the British.

There were four main documents that were the subject of negotiations: Italy's initial list of demands, Idris's initial list of demands, an Italian revision to Idris's list and Idris's comments and revisions to his own original list. The Italians largely accepted Idris's demands. The sticking point in negotiations was the Italians' request that he accept their demands in principle. The British backed Idris on this point, and the issue was referred back to Tripoli (capital of Italian Libya) and Rome. When it was made explicit that acceptance in principle did not mean acceptance in detail and that further negotiations would be necessary before the implementation of any Italian demand, Idris agreed to sign the modus vivendi on 14 April. Two separate agreements with the powers were signed on 16 April.

The modus vivendi was a provisional set of agreements. It called for the Sanusiyya to cease hostilities and for the Sanusi army to disband. Italy and the Sanusi agreed to release all prisoners-of-war. The Sanusi were to be permitted free trade with the coast and with Egypt, and Idris's rule recognized in the oases of Awjila, Jalu, Ajdabiya, Jaghbub and Kufra. The Sanusi institutes (zawaya) in Egypt, suppressed by the British, were to remain closed.

At Acroma, the Sanusi repudiated Ottoman authority as requested by the Italians and the British. Thereafter, Idris arrested the Ottoman agents in his territory and placed pickets along the frontier between Cyrenaica and Tripolitania to prevent any from crossing into his territory. There was no official recognition yet of Italian sovereignty by the Sanusi. Idris continued to deal directly with the British, despite Italian objections. In 1918, Italy and Britain even gave Idris arms to help him maintain his control over the Sanusi. The modus vivendi was superseded by the accord of al-Rajima on 25 October 1920, by which Idris accepted Italian sovereignty.