Muhamed Mehmedbasic (1887 29 May 1943) was a Serbian revolutionary and the main planner in the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, which led to a sequence of events that resulted in the outbreak of World War I.

Mehmedbasic was born in 1887 into a Muslim family in Stolac, in the region of Herzegovina (at the time part of Austro-Hungarian Bosnia and Herzegovina). His father was impoverished, formerly part of the Ottoman nobility. Mehmedbasic worked as a carpenter. During a Muslim youth organization's trip to Belgrade, Mehmedbasic befriended Mustafa Golubic (another Muslim, also from Stolac) who influenced his revolutionary feelings. Mehmedbasic, as did Mustafa Golubic, identified as Serb Muslim.

While working as a carpenter, Mehmedbasic befriended Black Hand member Danilo Ilic, the main organizer of conspiracy against the Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He joined the Young Bosnia revolutionary organization and became a colleague of its ideologue Vladimir Gacinovic, who was also a member of the Black Hand. As Mehmedbasic held strong Serbian nationalist sentiment, and Ilic and Gacinovic saw a strong character in him, he was given delicate duties. He was sworn into the Black Hand by Provincial Director for Bosnia-Herzegovina Vladimir Gacinovic and Danilo Ilic. In 191213, Serbia fought in the Balkan Wars. Black Hand founding member Vojislav Tankosic led a Chetnik detachment, in which many revolutionaries volunteered (including Golubic).

In late 1913, Danilo Ilic recommended the end of revolutionary organization building and a move to direct action against Austria-Hungary when meeting a Serbian captain and fellow Black Hand member in Uzice. Ilic then met with Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevic "Apis", the leader of the Black Hand, to discuss the matter. Apis' right hand, Serbian Major Vojislav Tankosic, called an action planning meeting in Toulouse, France. On Orthodox New Year, Golubic called Mehmedbasic, who was in Stolac, to immediately come to the meeting in Toulouse. During this January 1914 meeting, various possible Austro-Hungarian targets for assassination were discussed, including Franz Ferdinand. However, it was decided only to kill the Governor of Bosnia, Oskar Potiorek. The assassination plot was organized in Toulouse by Gacinovic and Golubic. Mehmedbasic was chosen for the task. He had left Stolac with 300 krone borrowed to finance the plot. Mehmedbasic was (according to himself) "eager to carry out the act to revive the revolutionary spirit of Bosnia." He was given a Swedish knife containing poison.

Mehmedbasic arrived at Dubrovnik by steamship, and then traveled by train. At the Hum train station, on the way to Sarajevo, gendarmes searched the train; fearing they were on to him, he threw the knife out the window. Potiorek was planned to be assassinated at the end of March 1914, when the new mufti Causevic was to be enthroned in Sarajevo. However, upon hearing that Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria would come to Sarajevo on Vidovdan, the Black Hand changed their minds. The Archduke's scheduled visit on Vidovdan (28 June), a Serbian national holiday, was perceived as an insult. Ilic summoned Mehmedbasic and informed him on 26 March that the plan now was to murder Archduke Franz Ferdinand, as ordered by Apis, and Mehmedbasic should stand by for the new operation. Mehmedbasic said during talks of the assassination that "half of Bosnia and Herzegovina will join the plot, and the other half will approve everything we do".

Apis and fellow conspirators Milan Ciganovic and Major Tankosic hired three youngsters, Gavrilo Princip, Nedeljko Cabrinovic and Trifko Grabez to carry out the assassination. Gavrilo Princip stayed in Sarajevo with Danilo Ilic, who hired three more as a backup team, Vaso Cubrilovic, Cvjetko Popovic and Mehmedbasic. On 28 June, a Sunday, a motorcade took the royal party to the City Hall for the official reception. Security was light; the Archduke objected to heavy security and soldiers between him and the people. 120 police officers were on crowd duty. The group of six assassins were positioned along the route, the Appel Quay. The first opportunity came to Mehmedbasic, who stood by the Austro-Hungarian Bank, but he lost his nerve (later claiming that a policeman stood near and would have intervened if he took his grenade) and watched the motorcade pass. Likewise, the second, Cubrilovic, did not act. The next, Cabrinovic, threw his bomb which bounced off the royal car and exploded under the following car, wounding two in the car and twenty in the crowd, then survived a suicide attempt as his cyanide did not work, and was arrested. Princip, hearing the explosion, believed the assassination to be a success and went to a nearby cafe. The motorcade made it safely to the Hall, and speeches were held, in which Franz Ferdinand was concerned about the injured and insisted on visiting them at the hospital, advised against by von Morsey but supported by Potiorek. As the motorcade took a wrong route to the hospital, it found itself outside the cafe where Princip was at; he fired fatal shots at the royal couple and then turned the gun at himself, however, two bystanders stopped him and he was arrested.

Cabrinovic and Princip gave up the names of their fellow conspirators under torture. Mehmedbasic managed to escape (wearing civilian clothes and a fez ) to Montenegro, arriving on 4 July, but Danilo Ilic, Veljko Cubrilovic, Vaso Cubrilovic, Cvjetko Popovic and Misko Jovanovic were arrested and charged with treason and murder. Upon learning that Mehmedbasic was in Niksic, the Austro-Hungarian authorities urged the Montenegrin authorities to have him arrested and handed over to them. Jovan Plamenac said that the Montenegrin government gave strict orders to capture Mehmedbasic, but informed the Austro-Hungarian diplomacy that the Montenegrin government had no intention to hand him over if they captured him, and that instead, a Montenegrin court would judge him. On 12 July, Mehmedbasic was apprehended by the Montenegrin authorities. However, before he was extradited he escaped from the Niksic prison two days later. It has been claimed that the Montenegrin government hid him and had him sent over the Cakor mountain into Serbia. The Austro-Hungarian authorities suspected Montenegrin collusion in his escape and arrested the gendarmes who guarded Mehmedbasic. During his captivity Mehmedbasic admitted his complicity in the assassination.

In Serbia, Mehmedbasic met up with Mustafa Golubic, with whom he joined the Chetnik detachment of Vojislav Tankosic that fought in World War I. He trained Bosnian volunteers. Mehmedbasic met with Apis on several occasions.

Mehmedbasic was accused of having participated in an alleged plot to kill Serbian regent Alexander in 1916. For some time, Regent Alexander and officers loyal to him had planned to get rid of the military clique headed by Apis who represented a political threat to Alexander's power. The Austro-Hungarian peace demand gave added impetus to this plan. On 15 March 1917 Apis and the officers loyal to him were indicted, on various false charges by Serbian Court Martial on the French-controlled Salonika front (known in Serbo-Croatian as Solunski proces). On 23 May, Apis and eight of his associates were sentenced to death; two others (one was Mehmedbasic) were sentenced to 15 years in prison. Charges were eventually reduced, leaving three death sentences in place. Among those tried, Apis, Ljubomir Vulovic, Rade Malobabic and Mehmedbasic confessed their roles in Sarajevo. During the trial, Mehmedbasic said that "I saw in Serbia with my eyes as the Piedmont of Serbdom, I couldn't see anything else..." and that his idol was "the national guslar (poet) singing Serbian songs". It was later found that Mehmedbasic had in fact proved the trial false. Serbia's Supreme Court retried the case and all defendants were exonerated (rehabilitated) in 1953.

He survived the war and called the arrival of the Serbian army in Bosnia and Herzegovina the "happiest day in his life". Mehmedbasic was commuted and released in 1919. He was pardoned by King Alexander himself, who reportedly gave him a house in Ilidza.

Mehmedbasic was killed during World War II by the Ustase on 29 May 1943. He was buried in the cemetery of the town of Ilidza, in the Butmir municipality, located on a side of the present-day Sarajevo Airport, in the outskirts of the city.