The armistice of Belgrade was an agreement on the termination of World War I hostilities between the Allied and Associated Powers and the Kingdom of Hungary concluded in Belgrade on 13 November 1918. It was largely negotiated by General Louis Franchet d'Esperey, as the commanding officer of the Allied Army of the Orient, and Hungarian Prime Minister Mihaly Karolyi, on 7 November. It was signed by General Paul Prosper Henrys and vojvoda Zivojin Misic, as representatives of the Allies, and by the former Hungarian Minister of War, Bela Linder.

The agreement defined a demarcation line marking the southern limit of deployment of most Hungarian armed forces. It left large parts of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (the Hungarian part of Austria-Hungary) outside Hungarian control including parts or entire regions of Transylvania, Banat, Backa, Baranya, as well as Croatia-Slavonia. It also spelled out in eighteen points the obligations imposed on Hungary by the Allies. Those obligations included Hungary's armed forces being reduced to eight divisions, the clearing of naval mines, as well as the turning over of certain quantities of rolling stock, river ships, tugboats, barges, river monitors, horses and other materiel to the Allies. Hungary was also obliged to make certain personnel available to repair wartime damage inflicted on Serbia's telegraph infrastructure, as well as to provide personnel to staff railways.

The terms of the armistice and the subsequent actions of the Allies embittered a significant part of Hungary's population and caused the downfall of Karolyi and the First Hungarian Republic, which had been established only 3 days after its signing. In 1919, the First Hungarian Republic was replaced by the short-lived, communist-ruled Hungarian Soviet Republic. Much of the Allied-occupied territories determined by the demarcation line (and additional territories elsewhere) were detached from Hungary through the 1920 Treaty of Trianon.

On 29 September 1918, in the final stages of World War I, Bulgaria signed the armistice of Salonica following the collapse of its defensive positions at the Macedonian front and withdrew from the war. The Allied Army of the Orient, commanded by French General Louis Franchet d'Esperey, rapidly advanced north as a result, recapturing ground that had been lost to the Central Powers in 1915. By 1 November, the Serbian First Army under vojvoda Petar Bojovic and the French Armee d'Orient, led by General Paul Prosper Henrys, reached Belgrade. Once there, the troops stopped to rest, with only minimal forces deployed across the Danube and Sava rivers, which represented Serbia's pre-war border with Austria-Hungary. The liberation of Serbia was largely complete.

By the second half of October 1918, Austria-Hungary was rapidly disintegrating, despite Charles I of Austria's offer to federalise the empire. In the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (the Hungarian part of the dual monarchy), the government was deposed as a result of the 2831 October Aster Revolution, and then replaced by the Hungarian National Council, which was led by Mihaly Karolyi. Due to his pacifist views, Karolyi was the most popular Hungarian politician at the time. On 29 October, the Sabor of Croatia-Slavonia broke its legal ties with Austria-Hungary, and the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (comprising the South Slavic-inhabited Habsburg lands) became independent. As the newly proclaimed authorities seized power, violence became widespread outside the capitals. Tens of thousands of army deserters, known as Green Cadres, resorted to banditry and looting for survival. Representatives of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs met with Serbian Prime Minister Nikola Pasic in Geneva on 69 November to discuss the creation of a unified South Slavic state, which even then was sometimes referred to as Yugoslavia.

Austria-Hungary signed the armistice of Villa Giusti with Italy on 3 November. The same day Bojovic informed the Serbian Supreme Command that lieutenant colonels Koszlovany and Dormanti, attached to the Hungarian general staff, had reached the Dunav Division's headquarters on authority of Generalfeldmarschall Hermann Kovess von Kovesshaza, with offers of an armistice. This information was then forwarded to d'Esperey, who provided the Chief-of-staff of the Serbian Supreme Command, vojvoda Zivojin Misic, with a list of six conditions to be demanded from Hungary before any negotiations could commence. They included the disarmament and withdrawal of Hungarian forces from a zone extending 15 kilometres (9.3 miles) from the pre-war Serbian and Romanian borders, the surrender of all vessels on the Danube, Sava, and Drina rivers and in the Adriatic Sea, and the supply of a delegate authorised to discuss the terms of the armistice. Misic replied to d'Esperey with a demand that Austro-Hungarian forces should evacuate from all territories reserved for a future South Slavic state, and requested that the Serbian Army be allowed to occupy the Banat and Backa regions up to the MuresBajaSuboticaPecs line. He noted that Serbia had been promised these areas following the 1915 Treaty of London.

In view of this development, Misic directed Bojovic to continue advancing north to capture Banat south of the Mures River, and west of the line about 10 kilometres (6.2 miles) east of Bela Crkva, Vrsac, and Timisoara. He also instructed Bojovic to capture Backa south of the BajaSubotica line. Both the First and the Second armies were instructed in less precise terms to advance west to Syrmia, Slavonia, Croatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Dalmatia; Serbian troops started heading towards these regions on 5 November. The same day, d'Esperey learned of the armistice of Villa Giusti and sent a telegram to Paris asking if he should continue negotiations or simply apply the terms of the existing agreement to his area of responsibility.

On 6 November, Karolyi led a delegation consisting of the Minister for Nationalities, Oszkar Jaszi, Hungarian National Council representative Ferenc Hatvany, Workers' and Soldiers' councils representatives Dezso Bokanyi and Imre Csernyak , and Prime Minister's office secretary Bakony. They were accompanied by 12 journalists from Budapest travelling by train to Subotica and then to Novi Sad, where they boarded the SS Millenium, which took them to Belgrade. The group also included a French interpreter. Karolyi hoped to save as much of the former Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen as possible. He hoped the Triple Entente would by sympathetic to his government on account of his wartime declarations against the war and alliance with Germany and perceive Hungary as a neutral, friendly nation.

The day when the Hungarian delegates arrived, d'Esperey received orders to continue negotiations while applying provisions of the armistice of Villa Giusti. He went to Nis, where he had talks with Misic and Regent Alexander regarding the upcoming talks with Karolyi, with a particular emphasis placed on the demarcation line.

On 7 November, d'Esperey arrived in Belgrade accompanied by the chief operating officer of the Serbian Supreme Command, Colonel Danilo Kalafatovic. D'Esperey summoned Karolyi and the rest of the delegation to his residence at 7:00 p.m. to start negotiations. While the two were travelling to Belgrade, a telegram was sent from Paris to d'Esperey instructing him to discuss only the implementation of the armistice of Villa Giusti and to forego any discussion of political matters. This message was forwarded to Belgrade via Thessaloniki, Skopje and Nis where it was intercepted by the assistant Chief of Staff of the Serbian Supreme Command, Colonel Petar Pesic. He forwarded the telegram to Kalafatovic along with a separate telegram from Misic asking Kalafatovic not to hand the message to d'Esperey until after the negotiations were completed. Pesic later sent another telegram to Kalafatovic instructing him to tell d'Esperey that in case he had agreed to a demarcation line further south than the TimisoaraSombor line, Serbia would continue the war against Hungary alone. Kalafatovic never showed d'Esperey the last telegram because the line agreed between him and Alexander in Nis was ultimately included in the terms.

Karolyi offered to agree to a cessation of hostilities and to implement a neutral foreign policy. D'Esperey presented him with 18 conditions for the armistice, explaining that he considered Hungary a defeated power. Karolyi stated he could not accept d'Esperey's terms and expect not to be executed upon returning to Budapest. He asked permission to send a telegram to French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, which was reluctantly granted by d'Esperey. In the message, Karolyi explained he could only accept the terms of the armistice if the territorial integrity of Hungary was preserved except in terms of Croatia-Slavonia, which he was willing to relinquish. At 10:30 p.m., the meeting was suspended for dinner and resumed for another 90 minutes at midnight. Karolyi then returned to Budapest, leaving two members of the delegation in Belgrade to await Clemenceau's reply.

Karolyi reported on the negotiations at a cabinet meeting on 8 November, noting the amount of horses and rolling stock demanded by the Allies for transportation. He also reported that the administration of the country (including south of the demarcation line) would be left to Hungary. The cabinet decided to wait for Clemenceau to reply before acting any further. That day, the Serbian Drina Division was tasked with occupying Syrmia and a part of Slavonia east of the BrodOsijekPecs line.

Clemenceau's reply to Karolyi's messages arrived in Belgrade on 9 November. D'Esperey was instructed to discuss military matters only and leave the political matters to others. He then left Kalafatic to forward the message to the remaining Hungarian delegates. The two returned to Budapest the night of 910 November, and d'Esperey left to Nis for a conference with Misic and Henrys before proceeding to Thessaloniki. On 9 November, a unit of former prisoners of war led by Serbian Army Major Vojislav Bugarski captured Novi Sad unopposed, and a different unit captured Vrsac the following day.

In Thessaloniki, d'Esperey urged the Romanian government to enter the war on the side of the Allies, and they complied ordering mobilisation on 10 November and commencing hostilities the next day. On 11 November, Bugarski forwarded Kalafatovic a message he was given by a Hungarian officer stating that the Hungarian National Council had accepted Clemenceau's terms and that Minister of War Bela Linder was arriving that day to Belgrade to sign the agreement. The message was then relayed to d'Esperey in Thessaloniki. He authorised Henrys to sign the agreement as revised by Clemenceau on behalf of the Allies, together with Misic.

After learning of the armistice of 11 November 1918 and that it applied to Hungary as well, Misic again instructed Bojovic to advance as far east in Banat as possible towards the OrsovaLugoj Timisoara line regardless of the presence of any Allied forces there. The armistice signatories met in the building of the State Direction of Funds in Belgrade at 9:00 p.m. on 13 November. No further changes were discussed regarding the text, except the time of cessation of hostilities. Originally, the draft stipulated a time 24 hours after the signing of the agreement, but Linder insisted that hostilities had already ceased. Henrys accepted his view and Misic then complied as well. The agreement was signed by Misic, Henrys, and Linder at 11:15 p.m.

The signed agreement consisted of 18 points. The first specified the demarcation line running along the upper course of the Somes before turning to Bistrita, then south to the Mures River and along its course to confluence with the Tisza from where it proceeded west to Subotica, Baja, and Pecs before reaching the Drava and the border with Croatia-Slavonia. It stipulated that the Allies would occupy the territory south and east of the line, with Hungarian police and gendarmerie units remaining in numbers sufficient to maintain public order and some army units being used to guard railways. The ninth point required the surrender of weapons and other materiel at places designated by the Allies for potential use by units they may establish. The tenth called for the immediate release of Allied prisoners of war and the continued captivity of Hungarian prisoners of war.

The second point limited the size of the Hungarian Armed Forces to six infantry and two cavalry divisions. The third point allowed the Allies to occupy any location in Hungary and use all means of transport for military purposes. Under the eleventh and the sixteenth points, German troops present on Hungarian soil were given until 18 November to depart. Hungary would void all commitments to Germany and forbid the transportation of troops and arms and prevent any military telegraphic communications with Germany. The fourteenth point placed all post and telegraph offices under Allied control. Furthermore, under the seventh point, Hungary was required to provide a detachment of telegraphists and material required to repair postal and telegraph service in Serbia.

Points four through six and eight determined the number of horses, rolling stock, ships, tugboats, and barges to be placed at the disposal of the Allied commander in Thessaloniki or as indemnity for Serbian war losses, as well as the supply of railway personnel for the same. The same provisions required the surrender of all river monitors. Point thirteen required Hungary to inform the Allies of the location of mines in the Danube and the Black Sea and to clear them from Hungarian waterways.

The twelfth point required that Hungary contribute to the maintenance of the Allied occupation forces, allowing requisitioning at market prices. Under the fifteenth point, an Allied representative was to be attached to the Hungarian Ministry of Food to protect Allied interests. Concurrently, under the seventeenth point, the Allies vowed not to interfere with the internal administration of Hungary. The final point stated that hostilities between Hungary and the Allies had ceased.

Charles I abdicated on 13 November, and days later, the First Hungarian Republic was proclaimed with Karolyi still at the helm. Henrys set up a French military mission to supervise the implementation of the armistice and deployed it to Budapest. It was led by Brevet Lieutenant Colonel Fernand Vix otherwise assigned to Henrys's staff. It consisted of twelve officers and forty-five enlisted men who arrived at Budapest on 26 November. In addition to the implementation of the agreement, Vix was tasked with gathering intelligence on economic and military matters. Within 24 hours, Vix was sent orders to obtain Hungarian withdrawal from areas of present-day Slovakia, in violation of the armistice of Belgrade, to enforce a claim by Czechoslovakia directed through French Foreign Minister Stephen Pichon. The Serbian Army occupied Subotica on the day of the armistice, but proceeded to capture Pecs the following day, as well as Timisoara, Orsova, and Lugoj on 15 November. It went on to occupy Sombor and Senta on 16 November, and the part of Arad on the south bank of the Mures on 21 November. The Serbian Army thereby completed the occupation of Banat, thus abolishing the Banat Republic which had been proclaimed only days earlier. In early December, the commander of the French forces in Romania, General Henri Mathias Berthelot, informed Vix that Romanian troops would advance to the Satu MareCareiOradeaBekescsaba line on the pretext of the protection of the Romanian population in the area of Cluj, and then ordered Vix to obtain Hungary's withdrawal from the city of Cluj itself. Vix complained about the conflict of authority to Henrys and d'Esperey as he was also receiving instructions from Berthelot and the Czechoslovak envoy to Hungary, Milan Hodza. Vix ultimately told Henrys that the armistice of Belgrade was worthless.

On 25 November, only days after the signing of the armistice, the Great People's Assembly of Serbs, Bunjevci and other Slavs in Banat, Backa and Baranja was convened in Novi Sad to proclaim the unification of these regions with Serbia. The State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs moved to seize Meimurje a region predominantly inhabited by Croats located just north of the demarcation line. The first attempt to occupy Meimurje in mid-November failed, but a second incursion by the Royal Croatian Home Guard resulted in the region's occupation on behalf of the newly established Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes on 24 December 1918.

According to Jaszi, before the armistice, the Hungarian public believed that the Allies would somehow reward Karolyi's pacifist pronouncements. Given that much hope had been placed in the principles of Wilsonianism, the terms of the armistice led to widespread disillusionment. D'Esperey was perceived as malicious, menacing, and ignorant. Many Hungarians grew bitter, not only because they found the terms of the armistice unjust, but also due to the real and perceived breaches of those terms. The number of discontent people grew further with the return of demobilised Hungarian troops, released prisoners of war and refugees from the occupied territories. The Karolyi government lost further support as it instituted a policy of land reform criticised as too radical by landowners and as half-hearted by others. Dissatisfied conservatives grouped around Karolyi's brother Gyula, whereas dissatisfied former officers were led by Gyula Gombos. The leader of the Communist Party of Hungary, Bela Kun, appealed to the proletariat.

In order to address increasingly frequent skirmishes along the HungarianRomanian line of control, the Paris Peace Conference decided on 26 February 1919 to allow Romanian troops in an area 25 kilometres (16 miles) beyond the demarcation line established by the armistice of Belgrade, and set up an additional neutral zone to be occupied by Allied forces other than Romanians. This established the "temporary frontier" along the AradCareiSatu Mare line. Vix was tasked with presenting the demand to the Hungarian authorities, along with the request that their withdrawal must start on 23 March and be completed within ten days. On 20 March 1919, Hungary was presented with the demand that became known as the Vix Note. In response, Karolyi resigned, and a revolutionary council established by the Social Democratic Party and the Communist Party assumed power. The council abolished the First Hungarian Republic, replacing it with the Hungarian Soviet Republic. In the summer of 1919, Soviet Hungary fought a war against Czechoslovakia and a war against Romania, resulting in the downfall of the communist regime and the Romanian capture of Budapest on 4 August. France urged the Army of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to move against the Hungarian Soviet Republic by advancing north from Backa, but no such military intervention ever took place. In June 1919, Banat was partitioned by the Allies against Romanian complaints that this was contrary to the promise of the entire region being awarded to Romania under the Treaty of Bucharest. By December, the Romanians gave way to diplomatic pressure and agreed to the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes receiving the western part of Banat.

On 12 August, the armed forces of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes occupied Prekmurje. The move had been authorised by the Paris Peace Conference a month earlier as compensation for the kingdom's contribution to the suppression of the Hungarian Soviet Republic. A short-lived republic was proclaimed in Prekmurje in late May, but was suppressed by Hungarian troops in early June.

On 4 June 1920, the Paris Peace Conference produced the Treaty of Trianon as the peace agreement between the Allies and Hungary. Territorial changes under the treaty awarded Transylvania, Crisana, the southern part of Maramures and the eastern part of Banat to Romania exceeding the armistice of Belgrade demarcation line in Romania's favour. The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes formally received Backa, the western part of Banat, and the southern part of Baranya a territory similar to the one specified in the armistice of Belgrade. A Yugoslav-Hungarian Boundary Commission was tasked with defining a definitive delimitation between the two states. From those territories, as well as those lost to Czechoslovakia and Austria, 350,000400,000 refugees left or fled to Hungary, where subsequently, according to Hungarian author Paul Lendvai, they became receptive to extremist and populist views.